---
title: 'Lessons I Learned from My Remodel'
date: '2020-03-10'
lead: 'In which I talk about building code instead of building code'
---

They say that remodels always take longer than expected. We were determined to
be different, but as Anna Karenina reminds us, each unhappy family is unhappy in
its own way. This is the story of how our remodel took an 8 week schedule slip,
and the lessons we've learned along the way.

## Lesson 1: Always make your contractors get permits.

Two weeks into our kitchen remodel, things were moving at a great clip.
Electrical was done and cleared to cover, plumbing was done, and mechanical
(read: new gas line) was set to be inspected. We had a beautiful new
underlayment for our upcoming LVT flooring, and new insulation was starting to
go into the exterior wall in anticipation of a clean mechanical inspection. The
shiny new appliances were staged in the garage, ready to be whisked inside when
the time was right.

A week earlier, a separate contractor had finished installing new basement
egress windows and wells, making our basement bedrooms safe to sleep in.
Previously, the windows in those rooms had been set 60" above the ground, and
were only 20" tall. When we were looking at getting our windows replaced our
salesperson kindly alterted us of the danger that existed in not modifying those
windows, and directed us to this contractor as someone who could modify the
foundation and install code-compliant windows and wells.

We had just gotten back from vacation and had missed the mechanical inspector
earlier in the day. We didn't understand this until a bit later, but the
inspector had refused to pass us not because there was anything wrong with the
new gas line, but that he could see significant work had been done for both the
egress windows (and also some plumbing), both without permit.

When my GC stopped by the planning department the next day (Friday) to file the
plumbing permit, he inquired about what would be required for the window wells
as a way of trying to help me out with what my other contractor had missed. Upon
hearing about the window wells, not only did they refuse to let him file the
plumbing permit, they also immediately sent an enforcer to my house.

## Lesson 2: Never become enemies with your neighbors.

The enforcer arrived within an hour, presenting his business card bearing the
delightful doublespeak title "Customer Response Team." I walked him around all
the work that had been performed recently, and after having been at my house
less than 10 minutes he graciously told me that since I'd been honest with him,
if I could get all my permits filed in the next 45 minutes he wouldn't issue me
a stop work order. Setting aside the fact that a/ the office closed in 15
minutes and was a ten minute drive away, and b/ it takes more than 5 minutes to
prepare permit documentation (more on this later), I got my GC on the phone and
we talked him down to Monday by 10am.

I would later find out that these are the people that show up when your
neighbors anonymously report unpermitted or unsafe work going on. They are the
champions of the meddlers, the swords of the spineless, true bureaucrats with
tiny empires. I hope never to deal with one again, and I shall be filing a
complaint to the city about the one who did show up at my house when all this is
done.

## Lesson 3: Yo dawg, I got an inspection for your inspection.

My GC and I showed up at 8am Monday morning with permit paperwork and building
plans in-hand, only to be told that now that the city was aware of already built
construction, we couldn't file anything until we'd paid for and gone through an
investigation inspection, where an inspector would notate everything wrong with
the areas being worked upon so we had a complete list of things which needed
permits (and what needed to be in them).

The inspector was too busy on Tuesday to see us, so they dropped by Wednesday
instead (a small blessing, which I'll explain in a second). After a short walk
through, he delivered the same verdict we'd had for almost a week: we needed a
building permit for the changed windows, and a permit for the plumbing. As he
left, I asked for his name and his card - he refused me a card ("I'm a ghost",
he enigmatically said), and then it turned out he was the same inspector who had
started this mess a week earlier.

## Lesson 4: Don't do multiple remodels at once.

For what it's worth, there was one more thing we were asked to file a permit
for - something to explain why two of the rooms downstairs had all the surfaces
ripped off the walls and were down to bare studs. You see, while my GC and his
team were doing the kitchen upstairs, I was trying to resurface and reshape a
couple rooms in my basement by myself. Why was I doing this on paternity leave
instead of spending more time with my children, you ask? Don't worry, my wife
asked the same question and I still don't have a good answer. What's important
for this story is that I hadn't really gotten to the permit-filing stage yet.

Unfortunately, the city does not want to see multiple, concurrent building
permits for a single property - too hard to keep track of, or something. So now
I have to get my half-baked ideas drawn up into real plans, and present them to
the city as part of the overall building permit where we're trying to get the
okay for a couple of changed windows so work on the kitchen can resume. I work
from the moment the inspector leaves on Wednesday and by Friday morning I have
scale drawings of the as-built and planned changes for the two rooms.

## Lesson 5: You are not an architect.

So we take our GC and our plans and our whole family back down to city hall at
8am. Seeing that we mean business, the planning department brings forth a
friendly face with the title of "Plans Examiner". He informs me that he will act
akin to my high school english teacher, and will grade my plans and let me know
what needs to change. I get a D Minus. No, I cannot file my permit today. No, I
cannot go home, fix all the redlines, and try again today. Better luck next
week. But hey, email the examiner directly and he'll grade your stuff remotely
next time. Also - do yourself a favor and hire an architect.

Also also, there's a 3 week queue on assessing permits once they're accepted, so
once they're okay with my plans I get to wait three weeks for them to stamp
them, even though they won't even accept them until they're already going to
pass. Apparently once we had un-permitted work we become banned from using the
express, over the counter permit process. So, thanks window contractor for
leaving me in this hole.

## Lesson 6: The universe hates you.

It's cool though, we were going to see an architect the next week anyway for
phase two, where we remodel the garage and need building permits for that. So we
all agreed to roll everything up into one mega permit - kitchen, windows,
basement, and garage. It was going to be great.

This is, oh, Friday Feb 28th. By March 1st, the entire world will be freaking
out about Covid-19 and buying toilet paper as fast as possible. Our architect
schedules time for us on Thursday, but emails the morning of to say "I've got a
fever and a cough, so I'll be going to the doctor instead of your house", with
the vague hope we'll be able to try again next week. This turned out to not be
the birthday present my wife was hoping for.

## Lesson 7: There's always a bright side.

In the midst of all this, we were scheduled to have all the windows in our house
replaced after waiting two months for everything to be fabricated. Normally
window replacements do not require permits, but with the threat of a stop work
order hanging over our heads (we didn't even know what this really meant), we
weren't sure if that prevented windows from being installed as well.

Due to a quirk in fate, the installers showed up a day early (didn't you get the
automated call?) and the inspector showed up a day late, and they arrived within
minutes of each other. I was able to clear the window install with the
inspector, and we've been able to celebrate our modern, warmer windows in the
midst of the rest of this storm.

I will also note that everyone we have had to deal with in this process (with
the exception of the enforcer) has been nice, helpful, and understanding, even
if they haven't been terribly flexible with the process delays.

And, while I'm not an architect, I've learned a lot about drafting up plans and
how a lot of civic systems I'd taken for granted work. So I'll no longer a
stupid homeowner with a hammer, going forward I'll be a stupid homeowner with a
hammer and a permit to use it.

Oh, and that eight weeks? One week to see a plans examiner, one week to wait for
an architect, one week to Covid-19, two weeks (projected) to draw up plans after
measurments, and three weeks of queue, minimum. What was originally intended to
be done April 1st we're hoping to see done by June 1st instead. But it'll get
done, it's just a matter of time.
